# 2019 instructor class project proposal

February 1, 2019

J.K. Rowling's "Harry Potter" series is one of the most widely-translated modern literary texts. The novels became bestsellers in Russia, and served as the inspiration for Dimitri Yemets's "parody", which featured a female wizard named Tanya Grotter who lived in Russia and attended a magical school that drew upon Russian folklore for its cast of characters. In 2003, J.K. Rowling's lawyers issued a cease-and-desist notice that blocked the translation and publication of the Tanya Grotter novels. While Yemets argued for his series being a parody --- allowable under copyright law --- the courts ruled against "Tanya Grotter".

This project revisits this case through the lens of computational literary analysis. A close comparative reading of "Harry Potter" and "Tanya Grotter" shows that the change in setting (from Great Britain to Russia) has a significant impact on the events and narrative description within the books. The project will compare word vectors for the Russian Harry Potter series, a comparable-size corpus of Russian-language Harry Potter fan fiction (acknowledged to be derivate works), and the Tanya Grotter series. I predict that the nearest-neighbors for key terms, or key term equivalents in the different corpora (including Harry/Tanya, Dudley/Pipa, Dumbledore/Sardanapal, McGonagall/Medusa, профессор/академик 'professor/academician', дядя 'uncle', магия 'magic') will show much greater similarity in Harry Potter and the Harry Potter fanfic than in Tanya Grotter. The word vectors will be run with and without lemmatization, to evaluate the impact of lemmatization on reducing challenges arising from sparse training data, as a result of Russian's extensive inflectional morphology.